      It is not considered good judgment to wade into the issue of recovered 
      memories without skin as thick as permafrost and caller ID on the phone. 
      Rare is the academic field in which colleagues on opposite sides of a 
      debate -- people with international reputations -- dismiss the very 
      foundations of one another's work, sometimes not so privately, with common 
      barnyard epithets; in which two of the most prominent reference books are 
      almost Jesuitically contradictory; in which more than a decade of fairly 
      sound research has done little to settle a debate that has raged ever 
      since Freud popularized the term ''repression.'' 
      Yet this is just where Susan Clancy found herself eight years ago when she 
      joined the psychology department at Harvard University as a graduate 
      student. At one end of the field of ''trauma memory'' were people like her 
      new professors and future co-authors, the clinical psychologist Richard 
      McNally and the cognitive psychologist Daniel Schacter, chairman of the 
      Harvard psychology department and one of the world's leading experts on 
      memory function. At the other end were Harvard-affiliated clinicians, 
      including Judith Herman, Bessel van der Kolk and Daniel Brown, whose 
      scholarly writing on the psychological effects of trauma remains highly 
      influential. 
      What the two sides disagree on is whether painful memories of traumatic 
      events can actually be repressed -- completely forgotten -- and then 
      ''recovered'' years later in therapy. Many clinicians say yes: it is how 
      we instinctively protect ourselves from childhood recollections that would 
      otherwise be too dire to bear. Most cognitive psychologists say no: real 
      trauma is almost never forgotten; full-blown, traumatic memories dredged 
      up decades later through hypnosis are almost invariably false. 
      Clancy, now 33, wasn't fully alive to the schismatic politics back then. 
      She simply saw a puzzling, inviting gap in the data. ''You had two groups 
      in opposite camps that were battling each other out'' over the validity of 
      recovered memories, Clancy says. ''But nobody was doing research on the 
      group that was at the center of the controversy -- the people who were 
      reporting recovered memories. Memory function in that group had never been 
      examined in the laboratory.'' 
      So she decided to devote herself to that task, which would end up 
      occupying her pretty much full time for the next seven years. Interview 
      subjects, mostly women but some men, all with recovered memories of child 
      sexual abuse, would come to her office in William James Hall -- a 15-floor 
      concrete cracker stack among the brick heritage buildings of Harvard. They 
      would settle in and, shifting their gaze from Clancy's blue eyes to the 
      John Hancock Tower in the distance, tell her their stories as the tape in 
      her recorder unspooled. 
      The stories were troubling. Often she found herself, somewhat 
      inappropriately, tearing up. Clancy's upbringing -- feminist, lapsed 
      Catholic -- had prepared her to believe what she was hearing. But as her 
      interviews went on, she came to the conclusion that many of the most 
      elaborate, most terrifying tales she was hearing had an air of 
      confabulation about them. ''There was a moment where I said, 'Oh, my God, 
      I'm not sure this really happened,''' she recalls. 
      Though the term ''false memory'' is slippery and inadequate, there is now 
      little doubt that the phenomenon exists. A rash of satanic ritual abuse 
      claims in the 1980's and 90's -- claims that were never substantiated but 
      destroyed families and ruined reputations -- demonstrated fairly 
      conclusively that both adults and children sometimes report things they 
      think happened that didn't. 
      Still, genuine memories of real sexual abuse are often prosecutors' only 
      tools to combat what remains a significant social problem. To distinguish, 
      in some definitive way, then, true memories from false memories is a trick 
      with enormous personal and political and public-policy implications. 
      Clancy guessed that there was a category of people who are prone to create 
      false memories and who might demonstrate this tendency when given a 
      standard memory test. Her strategy was to present a list of semantically 
      related words, like ''candy,'' ''sour'' and ''sugar,'' to those who 
      purported to have recovered memories. Then she would test their recall of 
      those words. On the test, she would throw in words that weren't on the 
      list but were like the words on the list -- ''sweet,'' for example. Her 
      hypothesis was that these people would be especially inclined to 
      ''remember'' seeing the word ''sweet'' -- in effect creating a 
      recollection out of a contextual inference, a fact from a feeling. In the 
      end, the data strongly supported her thesis. She published her findings in 
      2000 in the scientific journal Psychological Science. 
      But her work was criticized by some, in large part because it contained a 
      hidden snare: even if Clancy's ''false memory'' recoverers were prone to 
      fictionalizing memories of abuse, that didn't necessarily mean that their 
      specific memories of abuse were made up; there was no way to know whether 
      these people were actually abused. Clancy had anticipated this cavil while 
      still in the design stage of the study, and so she rounded up a second 
      control group -- people who had incontrovertibly been abused and had 
      always remembered that abuse, in contrast to the ''recovered memory'' 
      group. When people in this group took the word-recall test, they tended to 
      ''remember'' words that weren't on the list with no greater frequency than 
      the average person, and she was sure she had cracked the nut. 
      The critics, though, had another objection. What if the traumas that the 
      recovered-memory group had experienced were horrific enough not only to 
      repress the memory but also to cause cognitive impairment that showed up 
      as memory distortion in the lab? 
      Meanwhile, hate mail started pouring in, in quantities Clancy would 
      eventually measure ''by the ton.'' The reaction was not altogether 
      surprising. The moral dimension of research on child sexual abuse makes it 
      uniquely explosive in psychology, and almost from Day 1 Clancy had, beyond 
      the safe zone of her own department, taken heavy flak for even suggesting 
      that memories of abuse can be faulty. The simple act of conducting 
      research into the matter struck some as an enterprise ''designed to cheer 
      on child molesters,'' as one anonymous letter writer wrote, ''and 
      ridicules the suffering sustained by children who are abused as well as 
      therapists who are knowledgeable about the effects of trauma on children's 
      minds and bodies.'' Clancy was a ''bad person,'' according to another 
      letter writer, to question such reports. Yet another suggested that she 
      was probably an abuser herself. 
      In 2000, when Clancy was invited to give a lecture at Cambridge Hospital, 
      the chairman of the hospital at the time told her that several members of 
      its psychiatric department had protested her appearance. Her colleagues 
      told her that she had probably ruled herself out of future academic 
      positions in any psychology department, Harvard pedigree or no. 
      Clancy says she thought she could fix the problem by fixing her 
      word-recall test. She was close, she reckoned, but she needed to find a 
      different, methodologically cleaner, subject group than victims of child 
      sexual abuse -- people whose memories virtually everyone could agree were 
      false. But whom? She considered options: people who remembered their own 
      deaths? People who recalled past lives? No, there was just enough doubt in 
      those instances to taint the results. She would have to go further afield. 

      ''Have you been contacted or abducted by space aliens?'' read the ad that 
      ran in a number of Boston-area newspapers. ''You may be eligible to 
      participate in a Harvard memory research study.'' Clancy's new plan -- and 
      it seemed unimpeachable -- was to round up folks who thought they had been 
      beamed aboard spaceships, or who actually recalled the experience, and 
      give them the same memory test she had given the others. If they, too, got 
      high scores, it would establish that there are indeed people who are prone 
      to false memories -- which might eventually help scientists better 
      understand how false memories are created. Finally, she figured, she had 
      the makings of a sound study. Out she went into the community to recruit. 
      For two years, Clancy advertised in bookstores, visited Internet chat 
      rooms and haunted U.F.O. conferences, handing out fliers for her memory 
      study. At one point, in pursuit of appropriate subjects, she spent three 
      days at a meeting of a group of supposed alien abductees at an old seaside 
      Victorian inn in Newport, R.I. She sat in the hot tub with them as they 
      cheerfully told her their stories -- an astonishingly consistent set of 
      narratives involving bright light through bedroom windows, inexplicable 
      time blackouts, encounters with bobble-headed small gray people with large 
      black eyes and, often, invasive sexual medical experimentation. Among 
      themselves, the experiencers talked business. There was a consensus about 
      how stupid and misguided scientists were not to believe their accounts. 
      Someone related a skeptic's theory that the explosion of U.F.O. sightings 
      in New Jersey the previous year was caused by migrating birds, and the 
      crowd exploded into guffaws. Clancy smiled through gritted teeth. 
      Finally, she scraped together 11 willing subjects, ran them and a control 
      group through a battery of tests and collated the data, which 
      demonstrated, in her view, that ''individuals who are more prone to 
      develop false memories in the lab are also more likely to develop false 
      memories of experiences that were only suggested or imagined.'' She 
      submitted her study to the notoriously stringent Journal of Abnormal 
      Psychology. It sped through the review process and, to her great relief, 
      was published. Her problems looked to be solved. 
      ''I thought, Thank God, man,'' she recalls. ''With alien abductees, I'm 
      never going to have to deal with the criticism that it might have actually 
      happened.'' 
      In a mustard-colored suit -- the only suit he owns -- John Mack stands on 
      the stage of the theater inside Boston's Museum of Fine Arts with a light 
      shining on his face, like a museum exhibit of the moon. The documentary 
      film ''Touched,'' by Laurel Chiten, a Boston filmmaker, has just received 
      its world premiere, and Chiten and Mack, her main subject, are up there to 
      field questions. Through interviews, the film conveys what it's like to be 
      coerced into sexual congress with alien beings -- and, in at least one 
      case, to become an unwitting participant, apparently, in a kind of 
      intergalactic hybrid breeding program. 
      Mack, a quiet and erudite man, is a veteran of the Harvard medical faculty 
      whose blue-chip career took something of a William Jamesian turn toward 
      the mystical in the 70's. In 1994, he published the book ''Abduction,'' 
      which immediately piqued interest because Mack seemed to accept the 
      abduction phenomenon as literal fact. The book was a huge best seller. 
      Mack's Harvard imprimatur jacked the credibility of abduction accounts 
      into another orbit. Chris Carter, creator of ''The X-Files,'' used Mack's 
      work to help sell his show to Fox. 
      Clancy's study was, of course, a clear rebuke of the abductee experience 
      -- and it was met with derision at Mack's nonprofit organization, the 
      Center for Psychology and Social Change. Clancy had drawn a number of her 
      test subjects from the institute's ranks, and they may have felt poleaxed 
      by the disarmingly genial researcher who seemed to listen so 
      nonjudgmentally to their tales. The campaign to discredit Clancy began in 
      earnest. 
      ''Obviously there's a mammoth leap of faith involved in generalizing from 
      a mistake on a word list to the assumption that whole memories for 
      extended, anomalous events can be created more or less arbitrarily,'' 
      wrote a doctoral student named Catherine Reason on an Internet discussion 
      group. Just who was Susan Clancy, asked another, to challenge the work of 
      people whose theories of memory and trauma were cited by the United 
      Nations when discussing whether recovered memories of torture were 
      admissible as testimony in an international war-crimes tribunal? Some 
      simply viewed Clancy's 11 ''abductees'' as too small a sample size. 
      Mack and Clancy seem to have nothing against each other personally, though 
      the gulf in their worldviews appears unbridgeable. Clancy describes Mack 
      as ''good-hearted,'' an ''old-school gentleman'' who was insufficiently 
      aware of the memory-distorting effects of the hypnosis he used over the 
      years to expand upon abduction memories in many of his more than 200 
      patients. Mack is sanguine about the Clancy study, but blunt. ''I smell a 
      rat,'' he says in his light-filled Cambridge home a short walk from 
      Harvard Yard. ''Not that Susan's the rat, but in that a small 
      word-association test gets to be used, by whomever, to say, 'This is 
      simply memory distortion.''' 
      The abductees, in some ways, posed a more bewildering challenge to Clancy 
      than her previous memory-recoverers. ''Very few of them endorsed the 
      repression hypothesis,'' she says. They don't believe their conscious 
      minds repressed the memories of abduction trauma out of self-protection. 
      Rather, she says, ''you'd get extraterrestrial interpretations.'' The 
      reason they had no memories of those terrifying events until years or 
      decades later, the abductees usually say, is that the aliens, for 
      everybody's protection, erased or otherwise controlled them. 
      When I met with her in Cambridge, Clancy still seemed genuinely surprised, 
      almost awed, at the breadth of controversy her work has caused. ''Every 
      academic talk I give,'' she told me as we made our way to lunch near 
      Harvard Square, ''someone raises their hand and says, 'Who the hell are 
      you to say these stories aren't true?''' 
      Not long ago, Clancy appeared as a guest on a nationally syndicated radio 
      show that takes a broad-minded view of the paranormal. For nearly 20 
      minutes, she was called on that very question. The host pressed: ''Why do 
      you think that the only life forms are on earth?'' Clancy said she could 
      feel her blood pressure rising. 
      ''I don't necessarily believe that we're the only life form out there,'' 
      she said. ''I can entertain the possibility that there are other life 
      forms out there without accepting your story that a spaceship picked you 
      up!'' 
      Many scientists have offered a simple explanation for the phenomenon: 
      abduction experiences, they maintain, are all about the mind pumping for 
      meaning after a bout of sleep paralysis -- a scary but fairly common 
      experience in which the part of the brain that inhibits motor messages 
      during REM sleep fails to disengage as the sleeper wakes up. The sensation 
      is of being pinned to the bed, often accompanied by hallucinations of some 
      spectral entity at the bedside. 
      Some three million Americans believe they have had some kind of encounter 
      with space aliens. If everyone who experienced sleep paralysis came to 
      that conclusion, the number would be a hundred or so times as high. What 
      you have in an abductee, Clancy suspects, is someone who is predisposed to 
      believe. ''Here's someone who reads science fiction. They watch 'The 
      X-Files.' Then one night they have a sleep-paralysis experience. It's 
      weird and it's scary, and it becomes one of a multitude of events that 
      create that wonder.'' 
      As the subject tries to remember what happened, ''source'' errors creep 
      in. ''You think you're recovering your own memory, when in fact it's 
      something you pulled out of a movie,'' Clancy said. ''Memory's tendency to 
      be reconstructive, combined with the desire to believe, combined with a 
      culturally available script, leads to a false memory. The content of that 
      memory is dictated by the society you live in.'' The warnings that 
      experiencers report receiving from aliens, the Australian sociologist 
      Robert Bartholomew has pointed out, have changed over time -- from nuclear 
      destruction during the cold war to, more recently, ecological doom. These 
      are simply stories, he says, that give shape to our fears. 
      Ten years from now, Susan Clancy may remember 2003 as a year of agreeable 
      spadework in the trenches of academic inquiry. But if she does, it will be 
      a false memory. The truth is that Clancy's research, which she hoped might 
      mend fences -- at least partly vindicating both sides' positions -- has 
      managed to tick off just about everyone: sexual-abuse survivors, 
      therapists, experiencers, even a creationist or two. 
      Daniel Brown, the trauma therapist, is convinced that there's a 
      ''political agenda'' to Clancy's abduction study. As he told one reporter, 
      ''It's all about spin.'' Her own brother -- a corporate lawyer for a top 
      New York firm -- has ripped into her about the abduction study for 
      assuming outright that none of the abductions occurred. 
      From his vantage point a few dozen feet away in the Harvard psych 
      department, Richard McNally has watched Clancy, his former grad student, 
      face trial after trial. ''She's very thick-skinned, certainly for someone 
      at her stage of her career,'' McNally told me. But inside, it was getting 
      to her. 
      When we first spoke, about six months ago, Clancy said she believed she 
      could weather the storm. ''I don't think so anymore,'' she said recently. 
      ''When I was on the phone with lawyers two weeks ago and had to be 
      concerned that I was going to get brought up on ethics charges, it really 
      caused me to rethink what I'm doing here.'' 
      She seemed immensely relieved, therefore, to be getting out. Clancy has 
      accepted a visiting professorship at the Harvard-affiliated Central 
      American Business Administration Institute in Managua, Nicaragua, and will 
      leave later this summer. There she will continue to study how trauma 
      affects people, but the trauma will be verifiable life-threatening events: 
      diseases, hurricanes, land mines. 
      Oh. And she will do a little cross-cultural research on . . . abductees. 
      It turns out, just as John Mack has said for years, that this is a truly 
      universal phenomenon. ''Supposedly it's extremely common through Central 
      America,'' Clancy said. 
      When she returns, she will shop around her résumé. She hopes people will 
      still remember her. 
